My father, Aron, passed away last year, and since then I’ve delved headfirst into genealogy research. I did the 23andme DNA kit, started a family tree on MyHeritage, and, since my ancestors are all Ashkenazi Jews, done countless hours of research on sites like [Yad Vashem](http://yvng.yadvashem.org), [Jewish Roots Indexing - Poland](http://www.jri-poland.org), [MyHeritage](http://www.myheritage.com), [Geni](http://www.geni.com), [JewishGen](http://www.jewishgen.org), and [Ancestry](http://www.ancestry.com). I uncovered a lot of information specifically about my grandfather Josef, Aron’s father, whom he’d never met. And instead of those warm fuzzy feelings that can come from reading about how awesome or badass your ancestors were, I got the opposite. Josef turned out to be such a schmuck that I can’t believe I’m directly related to him. Here is the long-winded tale of how I was able to uncover all these unpleasant truths about a man who has been revered and remembered by the Jewish community as a wonderful, generous person.

# The Backstory
Aron, my Papa, was born in January 1946 in a shtetl in southwestern Ukraine along the Murafa River called Chernivtsi (not to be confused with the larger city in western Ukraine). He had an unusual upbringing for a number of reasons. For one, the vast majority of shtetls in Eastern Europe had been destroyed and all the residents murdered in the Holocaust, but Chernivtsi was one of the very few to survive completely intact. Another reason his childhood was unusual was because he grew up in a household entirely led by women — his mother, Rosa; his grandmother, Malka; and his aunts Klara, Rushka, Tsilya, and Fira. His father, Josef, was absent from the picture, and not from an honored death at the front like those of his peers who also didn’t have fathers, but because Josef left his wife Rosa while she was pregnant and never returned. It was a big enough scandal in the tiny village to make life difficult for my father. Luckily for him, he gained notoriety in his own right by becoming the class clown and town prankster, once going so far as to dig up a grave, take the skull and put it on the end of a long stick, and display it in the school window to scare teachers and students alike. He begged his mother to punish him for these misdeeds, taking off his belt and telling her to spank him with it. This is what he understood that fathers should do. But no matter how much he cried out for punishment, Rosa never obliged.

Despite these outbursts, my father finished school at the top of his class and was accepted to the engineering program at the university in Odessa, the nearest large city. He soon met my mother, Dina, a programmer, while working at the same company. They were married in 1973 and my brother Aleksandr was born the following year. At the same time, Rosa had retired from her accounting career, decided there was nothing left for her in Chernivtsi, and moved in with my parents in Odessa. My parents heard rumors that the Soviet government would open the borders for the first time since the war and allow Jews to leave, so they quickly applied. However, there was a rule stating that one had to have both their parents’ written permission to leave, unless they could provide proof that the parent(s) were deceased. This presented a huge problem, since Aron had no idea where his father was or if he was even alive. Since he could provide no proof of his father’s whereabouts, my parents’ request to leave was denied. They became known as refuseniks, and as a result many relatives and long-time friends cut off all ties with them, and with my grandmother Rosa and my mom’s parents as well, from fear of being associated with dissidents and targeted by the KGB. They had planned to have another child once they were out of the Soviet Union, but as the years went by they’d given up hope of ever leaving. I was born in 1985. A year and a half later, Gorbachev succumbed to international pressure and allowed Jews to leave again, this time as refugees through the Vienna-Rome pipeline. My parents swear that our family was on the first plane out of Odessa in 1987. We spent six months in Vienna, never actually making the next leg of the journey to Ladispoli, Italy, since my mom’s mother, Tsilya, had suffered a massive heart attack in Vienna and was declared too sick for travel. We arrived in the U.S. at Chicago’s O’Hare Airport on December 7, 1987 — my parents, my mom’s parents, and my brother and me. My grandmother Rosa had passed in 1980 and was buried in Odessa.

We were welcomed by HIAS (Hebrew Immigrant Aid Society) and Synagogue F.R.E.E. (Friends of Refugees of Eastern Europe) and were given certain necessities to transition to life in a brand-new country with an unfamiliar culture and language: an apartment on Chicago’s Devon Avenue in West Rogers Park, infamous for being a “fresh off the boat” immigrant neighborhood, even to this day; enrollment at a community college for my parents to learn English; enrollment in high school for my brother and day care for me; food stamps; and Social Security benefits for my elderly grandparents. We received clothing and toy donations and endured ant-infested living conditions until my parents both landed good jobs in their respective fields and we were able to move into our first home in the suburbs. Everything after that can be chalked up to the realization of the American dream.

# The Search Begins
In the early 2000s, Papa reached a place in his life when he was able to devote time and effort into looking for his long-lost father, whose absence had dramatically shaped his life. We now had the Internet at our disposal, so the search was on. In 2004, we found Josef. He and his wife Dora had made Aliyah (the term used when Jews “return home” to Israel) in 1976 and had died there in 2002 at the age of 98. We tracked down Dora, who was comatose, surviving on life support in their condo in Tel Aviv. My parents spoke on the phone with her live-in nurse as well as her sister, an interesting character in her own right. Dora’s sister, Halina, was a famous opera singer who now resides in Mexico City. Halina told us all about Josef and Dora’s life together. When Josef left Chernivtsi in 1945, he went back to his hometown of Warsaw to find any family members who may have survived the war, but of course they had all been murdered in the Shoah. So instead of coming back to his pregnant wife, he decided to go to Bergen-Belsen, a Nazi concentration camp that was now being used as a displaced persons camp for Jews who had survived but lost everything and had nowhere to go. At Bergen-Belsen, he made a name for himself as the camp’s cultural coordinator, organizing outings to the theatre and opera, inviting orchestras to come perform at the camp, and giving English lessons in shared spaces. Josef had been born into a wealthy family in Warsaw and worked as a linguistics professor before the war. He was fluent in Polish, Russian, French, English, Yiddish, and Hebrew. He taught English to the camp residents believing that they would all eventually immigrate to the U.S. This is how he met Dora and Halina. They were both Bergen-Belsen survivors—their parents and other sisters were killed, as well as Dora’s first husband and children. Halina described Josef as self-important, arrogant, and insufferable, but despite her assessment of his character he and Dora were married at the camp. In 1951, they had a child whom they named Moses Aaron. They left Bergen-Belsen shortly after and went to Hamburg, Germany. That summer, Josef worked as a teacher at World’s YMCA at the IRO Resettlement Centre Wentorf in Hamburg before they set sail for the U.S. They arrived on in New York on February 12, 1952, and in 1957 Josef became a U.S. citizen. They settled in Newark, NJ. All of this has been confirmed from online research.

Halina revealed that despite how idyllic their life seemed, it was far from the truth. Moses Aaron had been born with severe mental disabilities and was quickly put into a home once they settled in Newark. They rarely visited him and Josef never mentioned him in public. He preferred to flout his persona in the Jewish communities of New York and Newark as a patron of the arts and a generous donor to various Jewish organizations. At one point he was the president of the Religious Zionists of America. In 1976, he and Dora emigrated to Israel and left Moses Aaron behind, never to speak to or visit him again. He died alone in that home in Newark in 2001 at the age of 50. It’s unclear whether or not Josef and Dora came for the funeral, but Halina made a point to visit her nephew every week until she relocated to Mexico. When Josef died, Halina visited the apartment in Tel Aviv to take care of arrangements since Dora was still in a coma. She found a photo album that Dora had kept hidden from Josef, full of photos of Moses Aaron as a baby and small child. Apparently, Dora was forbidden to mention him in the 25 years they’d spent in Israel. At the funeral, Halina made a point to pay tribute to Moses Aaron’s passing as well, and guests were shocked to discover that a son had even existed. The fact that Josef had abandoned not only my Papa but his younger child as well never sat well with me. Papa decided to stop his search there because he was disappointed to say the least that he’d found Josef after his death and never would get the chance to connect with him. My mom and I both secretly thought, “Good riddance. You’re better off.”

# The Search Continues
Last year, I began to do a lot of research on my own and uncovered information about Josef’s life in Warsaw leading up to him abandoning Rosa in Chernivtsi. Josef was born in 1904 in Warsaw to Aron and Chaya, originally from Gora Kalwaria, a suburb of Warsaw. Josef graduated in 1925 with a degree in world languages and, like I mentioned earlier, became a foreign languages professor at the University of Warsaw. He was also the chairman of the Warsaw English Language Club. His younger brother, Henryk, was a card-carrying member of the Communist party in Warsaw as of 1938. The family was well-off and both Josef and Henryk enjoyed life among the intelligentsia in Warsaw. Josef was married to Regina, the daughter of a prominent member of Jewish society in Warsaw and owner of a profitable canning factory. They had a daughter named Eugenia, born in 1929. On September 1, 1939, Germany invaded Poland and everything changed. On November 1, Josef fled Warsaw to Lvov, leaving his daughter and parents behind. In a letter, he wrote that he left Warsaw with his wife, but I have found no evidence to support that. Also, since he wrote a testimonial for her death in Warsaw on Yad Vashem’s Shoah website, I believe he was lying. My theory is that he left Warsaw with Henryk since he would have been in immediate danger, not just as a Jew, but as a known Communist. On February 10, 1940, all Jews in Lvov were exiled to Komsomolsk-on-Amur, a city in Khabarovsk Krai in far eastern Russia. He was there for about 2 years, and there is no record of a wife being there with him. Interestingly, there is no record of Henryk either.

This is the part that my grandmother Rosa contributed herself. During the war, General Wladislaw Anders formed a volunteer army of Polish exiles in the Soviet Union. (You can read up on [Anders’ Army](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anders%27_Army) if you’re interested.) In 1942, Josef traveled to Guzar, Uzbekistan to enlist in Anders’ Army. He never served, though, because he fell ill with hepatitis. That is where he met Rosa. The rest of her family were put in a ghetto back in Chernivtsi, but she was able to flee and ended up in Guzar, working as a nurse to wounded Anders’ Army soldiers. By the time Josef recovered, the volunteer army had already been sent to Iran to fight. Josef and Rosa were married on July 25, 1942, and later that year she gave birth to a stillborn baby.

In 1943, they went to Dzhambul (now known as Taraz), Kazakhstan, where Josef worked as the head of a shoe repair shop, but tried to get a position as a schoolteacher. That year, Rosa gave birth again, this time to a healthy baby boy. However, the next day she was told by hospital personnel that the baby had died under mysterious circumstances and they had already buried him. She was in disbelief, especially at Josef’s nonchalant reaction. There were stories of babies born during the war that mysteriously disappeared in this way and were sold to generals and other high-ranking members of the Soviet army whose wives were unable to have children of their own. Rosa suspected that Josef had done exactly this, since they suddenly had more money and Josef didn’t seem concerned and didn’t demand an explanation about the perfectly healthy baby who had simply died. In the spring of 1945, the war had ended, Josef had been unsuccessful in finding a teaching position, and Rosa was pregnant yet again, so they decided to head back to Chernivtsi. She reunited with her family, who all survived except her oldest brother, who had fought at the front. She made preparations for the new baby, but Josef decided that he would go back to Warsaw. He stayed in Chernivtsi for three days before he left on September 12, 1945. He wrote her letters along the way, from Mogilev-Podolsky and Chernivtsi (the city), asking her to join him once the baby arrived. He sent a final letter on November 15 from Lodz, telling her that if she decided not to write back, he wouldn’t come back for her because he hated her family. It’s unclear whether Rosa wrote back but was unable to reach him, was unable to write back, or simply didn’t want to write back. Maybe her experience with the mysterious loss of her second baby in Dzhambul made her appreciate the safety of her family and community in Chernivtsi, and she didn’t trust him. Or maybe she just didn’t want to settle in Poland. I’ll never know because she died before I was born, and all I know is what’s written in those letters. But I do know that he abandoned his first child, Eugenia, when he fled Warsaw. I also know that he abandoned his fourth child, my father, Aron, when he went back to Warsaw. I know that he abandoned his fifth and last child, Moses Aaron, when he dumped him in that home for mentally disabled children and never looked back. And my grandmother Rosa sincerely believed that he sold his third child to a Soviet official. What a mensch.

# What a Schmuck
A few months ago, I discovered that Josef had published a manuscript in 1960 detailing his time and experiences at the Bergen-Belsen displaced persons camp, and I immediately wrote to the San Francisco Holocaust Library to get a scanned copy of it. It took a few weeks and considerable copying fees, but once I received it, I read through all 168 pages. And then I understood why the manuscript arrived with a disclaimer stating that the views expressed within were in no way shape or form shared by the library. It was a horrifying read from start to finish. Josef came off as arrogant, self-important, and insufferable — exactly as Halina had described him. But he also came off as condescending, classist, and petty. Several times he complained about how another man at the camp, who appointed himself the leader, was the worst person to ever walk the earth. What I understood was that Josef and the man were rivals, competing for the recognition and adoration of the residents of the camp, and the other man won out. This made Josef bitter and petty and made him take jabs at the man every chance he could throughout the manuscript. Josef also went on for a few pages about how uncultured all these displaced Jews were, and how he was saving them from their humble provincial backgrounds by exposing them to fine arts and culture. He then went on a rant for several pages about how these Jews brought the Holocaust upon themselves by turning away from G-d and the Torah and assimilating into secular European culture. He finished by highlighting how well-connected he was in the worldwide Jewish community by sharing replies from letters he'd written to prominent Jewish leaders. Somehow I finished reading that dumpster fire and ended up hating the man who’d written it. He played himself up as this wonderful, generous, philanthropic man who was elevating Ashkenazi culture to new heights. But conspicuously missing from his manuscript was any mention of his first wife and child, who he’d abandoned to be murdered in Warsaw; his second wife and child, who he’d abandoned to go back to Warsaw; and his new wife and child, who I saw in one small photo somewhere after page 100, off to the side of the shot in what was clearly meant to be a photo of the entrance to the camp.

This terrible person was my grandfather. And he published a manuscript for all to glimpse his disgusting views and personality — a manuscript that has been referenced many times by many authors on the subject of the Holocaust and displaced people after the war. I’m relieved that my Papa never got to meet him. My Papa was an extraordinary man who cared deeply for my mom, my brother, and me, as well as his many dear friends. He was a gifted mechanical engineer, respected by all his colleagues. He never held a grudge. He treated everyone with respect, regardless of their appearance or status or origins. He never condescended anyone, but rather lifted people’s spirits with humor. And he became that wonderful man without having someone like Josef in his life. I consider myself lucky that Aron was my father. Now THAT is the legacy I hope I can give to my descendants when it’s their turn to search for their past.
